A Binary Search Tree (BST) is a special type of binary tree in which the left child of a node has a value less than the node’s value and the right child has a value greater than the node’s value. This property is called the BST property and it makes it possible to efficiently search, insert, and delete elements in the tree.

The root of a BST is the node that has the smallest value in the left subtree and the largest value in the right subtree. Each left subtree is a BST with nodes that have smaller values than the root and each right subtree is a BST with nodes that have larger values than the root.

Binary Search Tree is a node-based binary tree data structure that has the following properties: 
    The left subtree of a node contains only nodes with keys lesser than the node’s key.
    The right subtree of a node contains only nodes with keys greater than the node’s key.
    This means everything to the left of the root is less than the value of the root and everything to the right of the root is greater than the value of the root. Due to this performing, a binary search is very easy.
    The left and right subtree each must also be a binary search tree.  
    There must be no duplicate nodes(BST may have duplicate values with different handling approaches)

Handling approach for Duplicate values in the Binary Search tree:
    You can not allow the duplicated values at all.
    We must follow a consistent process throughout i.e either store duplicate value at the left or store the duplicate value at the right of the root, but be consistent with your approach.
    We can keep the counter with the node and if we found the duplicate value, then we can increment the counter


Delete a Node of BST: It is used to delete a node with specific key from the BST and return the new BST.
Different scenarios for deleting the node:
    Node to be deleted is the leaf node : Its simple you can just null it out.
    Node to be deleted has one child : You can just replace the node with the child node.
    Node to be deleted has two child :
Need to figure out what will be the replacement of the node to be deleted.
Want minimal disruption to the existing tree structure
Can table the replacement node from the deleted nodes left or right subtree.
If taking if from the left subtree, we have to take the largest value in the left subtree.
If taking if from the right subtree, we have to take the smallest value in the right subtree.
Choose one approach and stick to it. 